content/_index.md, before:

---

---

# DEMO EDITION. Real page at http://ellingtonia.com.

> "Some Day all the jazz musicians should get together in one place and get down on their knees and thank Duke."      <cite>Miles Davis</cite>


# Home

The principal aim of this site is to provide as full an on-line discography of the recorded Works of Duke Ellington as possible. Many sources have been consulted including, Massagli and Volonté's "The New DESOR", The DEMS Bulletin and archive, DESUK's "Blue Light", Ken Vail's "Duke's Diary", Dr. Stratemann's "Duke Ellington - Day by Day and Film by Film", Mark Tucker's "Ellington - The Early Years" and last but by no means least, David Palmquist's excellent portal to all things Ellington at http://ellingtonweb.ca/. This includes his essential guide to the what, where of The Duke's itinery, a work that meant I could drop a time line from this site, at http://tinyurl.com/zd5huwa

Additionally, you will be able to find all the titles Duke recorded and the names of the writers, and, eventually, the names of all his sidemen and other artists who recorded with him.

This project began on 1 January 2010 and the discography section is now complete.

As with all discographies, this will always be a work in progress and cannot be thought of as definitive. Errors and omissions are still being found, as is the occasional unreleased item, all of which will be included as and when they come to light.

For a listing of Ellington CDs go to :-

http://tinyurl.com/jbecsjm

## The Duke Ellington Society

http://tinyurl.com/jutgt9p

## Duke Ellington Society of Sweden

https://ellington.se


## Articles

Where known, the original author and source is given. Where it has been impossible to contact the authors or their estates or defunct publications for permission to publish on the web, it is to be hoped that they will view the re-publication as an acknowledgement of their worth as historical commentary.

# Ellingtonia.com Blog

Commit message:

Tidy up front page etc

content/_index.md, after:

---
---

*"Some Day all the jazz musicians should get together in one place and get down on their knees and thank Duke."*

--- <cite>Miles Davis</cite>

# Ellingtonia.com

The principal aim of this site is to provide as full an on-line discography of the recorded works of Duke Ellington as possible. The discography was created by Marcus Girvan, drawing on many sources including Massagli and Volonté's "The New DESOR", The DEMS Bulletin and archive, [DESUK's](https://dukeellington.org.uk) "Blue Light", Ken Vail's "Duke's Diary", Dr. Stratemann's "Duke Ellington - Day by Day and Film by Film", Mark Tucker's "Ellington - The Early Years" and last but by no means least, David Palmquist's ["The Duke: Where And When" (TDWAW)](http://tdwaw.ca), the essential to The Duke's itinerary.

Please note that due to the sheer quantity of recorded output, the pages on this site can be large and are not well-suited to use on mobile devices.

As with all discographies, this will always be a work in progress and cannot be thought of as definitive. Errors and omissions are still being found. Decades after Duke's last recording, new compilations continue to be released on CD, LP and via streaming services. Corrections and contributions are gratefully received.

Marcus has now retired from day-to-day maintenance of this site. Please contact Charlie Dyson (charlie@charliedyson.net) if you spot something that's missing or wrong.

## Other resources:

* A list of Ellington CDs (no longer updated, but useful): http://www.ellingtonweb.ca/Hostedpages/CDCatalogue/CD-Lists.htm
* The Duke Ellington Society UK (DESUK): https://dukeellington.org.uk
* The Duke Ellington Society of Sweden (DESS): https://ellington.se
* The Duke Ellington Society: http://thedukeellingtonsociety.org (archived site)

# Ellingtonia.com Blog
